---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-06-29
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2020-06-29
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-06-29-pwg",
        "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-06-29",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-06-29",
            "endDate": "2020-06-29",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Garth Conboy"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ivan Herman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dave Cramer"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ric Wright"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2020-06-29

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2020Jun/0013.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/06/29-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Ivan Herman, Dave Cramer, Wendy Reid, Avneesh Singh, Ric Wright, Brady Duga, Ben Schroeter, Marisa DeMeglio, Garth Conboy, Matt Garrish

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Garth Conboy

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Wendy Reid:* previous meeting's minutes: [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-06-08-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-06-08-pwg)

**minutes:** Silence: Approvfed.  

### 1. testing. implementations
{: #section1}

**Wendy Reid:** Test content added.  
… All short.  
… four new packaged; one unpackaged.  
… Publishers implementations report coming soon (today).  

> *Wendy Reid:* garth: We're ingesting LPF in the audiobook pipeline

> *Wendy Reid:* ... working on getting the TOCs ingested as well, and supplemental content

> *Wendy Reid:* ... progress has been made, but not complete

**Wendy Reid:** Reached out Laurent & Lars. Been making progress on completing tests  
… Thorium does support LPF — it works.  
… Other updates?  

**Avneesh Singh:** Working on DAISY output tools (OBI).  

**Wendy Reid:** Manifest is core.  

**Avneesh Singh:** plus audio and TOC.  
… How validate?  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** Has processor, not really a validator.  
… Can run output through Marisa’s tool, with catch some errors.  

**Wendy Reid:** There is a need for a validator.  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** Is there a good JSON-LD library for validation?  

**Ivan Herman:** Yes there is. Ivan’s tool is doing JSON testing directly. Could be packaged to be more user friendly.  
… Converts JSON to internal structure and tries to catch errors along the way.  
… Also does TOC testing.  
… If folks can use it, it’s there.  

**Dave Cramer:** Took time &money for Epubcheck to get where it is for eBooks… so validation is non non-trivial.  
… Maybe add audiobook support to epubcheck?  
… Be great for adoption.  

**Avneesh Singh:** Epubcheck work is set through this year; could be good for next year.  
… Could be easy-ish.  

**Ivan Herman:** Audiobooks are simpler so could be a a good path to validation.  
… Check JSON/Manifest.  
… Need also to check audio files, and various pointers.  

> *Avneesh Singh:* Even EPUBCheck does not go into details of audio files and timings, at this stage.

> *Avneesh Singh:* But better media overlays support in EPUBCheck will come.

**Wendy Reid:** Checking files types would be within reason (against Manifest).  
… can continue to explore.  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** Submitted PR with test results.  
… “worlds best audiobook player” (repository name) :-)  

**Wendy Reid:** Happy 4th (for Americans)… and Canada Day too!  

---
