---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-07-27
title:  — 2020-07-27
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-07-27-pwg",
        "name": " — Minutes",
        "about": "",
        "dateCreated": "2020-07-27",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "",
            "startDate": "2020-07-27",
            "endDate": "2020-07-27",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Garth Conboy"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ivan Herman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Simon Collinson"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dave Cramer"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

#  — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2020-07-27

See also the [Agenda](https://www.w3.org/mid/AC3DD8B7-852A-4861-872B-CF6227B8E496@rakuten.com) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/07/27-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Gregorio Pellegrino, Ivan Herman, Ben Schroeter, Wendy Reid, Garth Conboy, Marisa DeMeglio, Tzviya Siegman, Simon Collinson, Brady Duga, Dave Cramer, Matt Garrish

**Regrets:** Laurent Le Meur

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Garth Conboy

**Scribe(s):** Wendy Reid

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Garth Conboy:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-06-29-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-06-29-pwg)

**Garth Conboy:** Minutes from last meeting  
… any objections?  
… 3 2 1 approved!  
… a few testing updates  

### 1. testing updates
{: #section1}

**Garth Conboy:** Google Play books are rolling out the initial implementation of audiobooks to production this week  
… it's not perfect, but we can find everything, the only major issue is finding the reading order from the TOC instead of the manifest  
… the sample audiobooks are all processable  
… progress!  
… for Ivan, is there a formal thing?  

**Ivan Herman:** There is a series of tests you have to do locally  
… all kinds of crazy manifests that do various things  
… you should react accordingly to the tests  
… you return a JSON file with the results  

**Garth Conboy:** Offline, I will work with you on how to run these!  
… we're probably not looking for problems, only what we can support  

**Ivan Herman:** Wendy or I will send the pointers  

> *Wendy Reid:* [wendy will]

**Garth Conboy:** We got an email from Laurent in regards to Thorium  
… they have progress but not quite ready for testing yet, no embedded manifests, no time frame but progress  
… any other updates?  
… I would like to use this opportunity to say that now that we have implementations, we need real content  
… we have heard from some publishers, but we need more!  
… anyone with influence, please talk to them  

**Ivan Herman:** I am just beginning to be worried, the charter expires Nov 1  
… the voting period for proposed is now 4 weeks again (was previously 6 weeks)  
… we should have the PR out for voting at the end of September  
… taking into account administration  
… we should be getting reading for the transition in the beginning of September  
… we have 1 month to get implementations in  
… with google we have 2  
… but to get Thorium and Kobo would be even better  

**Garth Conboy:** What about Ivan and Matt's 2 implementations  

**Ivan Herman:** They're just experiments  
… tempted to remove them, if I want to be self-critical  
… they wouldn't be acceptable  

**Garth Conboy:** Extra credit  

### 2. AOB
{: #section2}

> *Matt Garrish:* [https://github.com/w3c/pub-manifest/issues/226](https://github.com/w3c/pub-manifest/issues/226)

**Matt Garrish:** Into the AOB  
… we have an open issue to close  
… use a W3C URL redirect for our schemas  
… we just need a vote  
… we put a GH URL  
… hopefully we all agree  

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* +1

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Simon Collinson:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* +1 to w3c, -1 to github :)

**Tzviya Siegman:** Just wanted to mention, Matt, Romain, and I had a call with the ARIA WG  
… we published DPUB ARIA a lifetime ago  
… we'll be doing a minor update to DPUB ARIA to deprecate some roles  
… Matt is doing the editorial work, and we'll be shifting DPUB ARIA to ARIA officially  
… anything we're changing was causing errors and now will not  

**Ivan Herman:** The vote for the EPUB3 WG ends this Friday  

> *Wendy Reid:* .. we have 38 votes

**Ivan Herman:** out of the 38, one abstention, 1 with comments which have been addressed in a PR  
… unless something nasty comes in this week, we are looking good  

**Garth Conboy:** The comments were minor and easy to handle?  

**Ivan Herman:** Yes  

**Garth Conboy:** talk to everyone soon!  

---
