---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-01-27
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2020-01-27
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-01-27-pwg",
        "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-01-27",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-01-27",
            "endDate": "2020-01-27",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Deborah Kaplan"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Franco Alvarado"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Garth Conboy"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "David Stroup"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tim Cole"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2020-01-27

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2020Jan/0023.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/01/27-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Tzviya Siegman, Deborah Kaplan, Dave Cramer, Ben Schroeter, Franco Alvarado, Gregorio Pellegrino, Brady Duga, Garth Conboy, Bill Kasdorf, David Stroup, Tim Cole

**Regrets:** Wendy Reid, Marisa DeMeglio, Luc Audrain, Joshua Pyle, Benjamin Young

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Tzviya Siegman

**Scribe(s):** Dave Cramer

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-01-06-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-01-06-pwg)

### 1. minutes
{: #section1}

**Tzviya Siegman:** this is from two weeks ago; the last minutes that haven't been approved  
… minutes approved  

> ***Resolution #1: minutes of 6.01 approved***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 2. editorial republication of the specs
{: #section2}

**Tzviya Siegman:** Matt has been doing edits on pub manifest spec  
… but he's not here  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://w3c.github.io/pub-manifest/](https://w3c.github.io/pub-manifest/)

**Ivan Herman:** it's all editorial  
… before XMas matt and I implemented the algo  
… and we tried to go through as it was written in the spec  
… and we found some small issues  
… and there were some similar changes in the audio book spec  
… one or two small changes  
… there was a missing extension point  
… this didn't invalidate previous steps  

**Tzviya Siegman:** there's still an open PR on pub-manifest  
… I don't see changes in audio since 3 Jan  

**Ivan Herman:** there are changes since last publication  

**Tzviya Siegman:** should we republish?  
… it's not going to affect the status  
… do we have enough people to vote?  

**Ivan Herman:** yes  

**Tzviya Siegman:** let's vote on these separately  
… the proposal is  
… republish pub manifest  

> **Proposed resolution: Re-publish Pub-manifest** *(Tzviya Siegman)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Deborah Kaplan:* =1

> *Franco Alvarado:* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Deborah Kaplan:* +1

> *David Stroup:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> ***Resolution #2: Re-publish Pub-Manifest***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

> **Proposed resolution: republish audiobooks** *(Dave Cramer)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

**Tzviya Siegman:** there are two editorial issues  
… do we want to deal with them?  

**Ivan Herman:** first one is covered by open pr  
… it's ok if they're left open  
… many of these changes go back to december  

> **Proposed resolution: re-publish audiobooks** *(Tzviya Siegman)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Dave Cramer:* +1

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1

> *Deborah Kaplan:* +1

> *Tim Cole:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *David Stroup:* +1

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> ***Resolution #3: republish audiobooks***
{: #resolution3 .resolution}

### 3. update on testing
{: #section3}

**Tzviya Siegman:** any news from the testing front on any spec?  

> *Ivan Herman:* crickets...

**Tzviya Siegman:** I talked to someone who might be interested in testing  
… are we at risk at all  
… we have a lot of commitments about tests, but few tests so far  
… we have lots of experimental work, not real-world tests  

**Ivan Herman:** I'm not sure I agree  
… the really testable parts of the spec are very few  
… they are in the algos  
… and there are lots of tests for those cases  
… there are some behavioral tests that are missing  
… but that's ok  
… the real problem is that the implementations are toy implementations  
… we don't have real world implementations that go through those tests  

**Tzviya Siegman:** yes  
… any volunteers to start testing? I'll ping some people  
… anything else to cover today?  
… thanks everyone  

---


### 4. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): minutes of 6.01 approved
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Re-publish Pub-Manifest
* [Resolution #3](#resolution3): republish audiobooks