---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-06-08
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2020-06-08
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-06-08-pwg",
        "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-06-08",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-06-08",
            "endDate": "2020-06-08",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "George Kerscher"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Garth Conboy"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Juan Corona"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ivan Herman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}

**Date:** 2020-06-08

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2020Jun/0000.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/06/08-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** George Kerscher, Wendy Reid, Dave Cramer, Marisa DeMeglio, Tzviya Siegman, Brady Duga, Avneesh Singh, Ben Schroeter, Garth Conboy, Juan Corona, Ivan Herman, Gregorio Pellegrino

**Regrets:** Laurent Le Meur,  Matt Garrish, Teenya Franklin

**Guests:** Adaret

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Dave Cramer

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---



### 1. approving minutes
{: #section1}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-04-27-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-04-27-pwg)

**Wendy Reid:** minutes approved  

### 2. updates to testing and progress
{: #section2}

**Wendy Reid:** I will give a kobo update  
… but I don't have an update  
… it's on their roadmap, but has been delayed  
… it should happen this summer  

**Garth Conboy:** I have a question  

> *Dave Cramer:* (unminuted discussion of Zoom)

**Garth Conboy:** we have started implementation for ingest of audiobook format  
… I don't have an ETA for completion  
… but it's a start :)  
… the question I have is  
… in the samples, there are five samples, one of which is LPF packaged  
… are there other packaged LPFs available?  
… it would be helpful to implementers to have access to more  

**Wendy Reid:** I don't have more  
… I could make more  
… readium might have a converter  
… otherwise, Lerner might have some content for us  
… tricky for LPF--they are too big to store on github  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** one comment about the LPF there now  
… I pushed a lot of changes to the repo, but did not update the LPF  
… so the unpackaged one is updated but not the packaged one  

**Wendy Reid:** I can update that one  
… I was having a tool problem  
… I thought I was making LPFs properly but then Daniel told me I was doing it wrong  
… I was renaming zip; there was a folder...  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** is LPF just zip with different extension?  
… or like EPUB where mimetype has to be uncompressed?  

**Wendy Reid:** if anyone is good with command-line zip we could use help  

**George Kerscher:** are we considering a validator?  
… it concerns me when Marisa doesn't know if something is valid  

**Wendy Reid:** we don't have a validator  
… that's the biggest challenge we have  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** I wrote a library that processes the manifests  
… you can use it to see where it throws validation errors  
… but it is absolutely not a validator  
… it is caveat-ful  

**Tzviya Siegman:** if we're considering a validator, it's not something that's in the charter of the WG  
… we have to figure out who would be working on it  

**Wendy Reid:** it could be in the maintenance working group (?)  
… any other updates about testing?  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** I submitted results to pub manifest tests and audio manifest tests  
… I thought about taking the ebookcraft demo and running the UA behaviour tests aginsst that,  
… would it be useful?  

**Wendy Reid:** yes  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** I can do that probably this week  

**Wendy Reid:** the only other changes ... we have to make some small changes to the pub test repository  
… in talking to some publishers we want to include a section about content creation rather than content processing  
… the implementations are both valid but different  

**Garth Conboy:** marisa, did I hear that there are updates to the disassembled LPF samples that we should incorporate in LPF version?  

**Marisa DeMeglio:** yes  

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* Example of manifest validation errors: [https://marisademeglio.github.io/audiobooks-js/example/?q=https://marisademeglio.github.io/audiobooks-js/tests/files/manifests/manifest-audiobook-bad-durations.json](https://marisademeglio.github.io/audiobooks-js/example/?q=https://marisademeglio.github.io/audiobooks-js/tests/files/manifests/manifest-audiobook-bad-durations.json)

**Wendy Reid:** any other business?  

### 3. Miac chit-chat
{: #section3}

**Garth Conboy:** Ivan went to the publishing summit to hear about blockchain  

**Ivan Herman:** I prefer to use the term "ledger" :)  
… the company works on a distributed ledger that has content and metadata  
… there was another thing mentioned  
… that was presented last year  
… ISCC  
… generating unique identifiers for digital artifacts  


**Ivan Herman:** which could be useful  
… there was nothing revolutionary, Garth  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://posth.me/iscc/](https://posth.me/iscc/)

**Garth Conboy:** thanks  

**Tzviya Siegman:** the ISCC stuff is interesting; I'm supposed to be on the committee in ISO  
… we could use tech people in ISO  
… there is also nobody from trade publishing  

**Ivan Herman:** there are some technical statements  
… last year I remember hearing that they claim, if you have a digital artifact, if you make some same changes, they realize it's a same artifact  
… I don't know how they do that  

**Brady Duga:** for the creation of LPF, is the issue you're compressing the audio files?  

**Wendy Reid:** the issue is I get a folder at the top level, which is annoying  

**Garth Conboy:** I have this command line thing for EPUB  
… I'll play with it to optimize it for LPF, and send it out  

**Wendy Reid:** I'm using jiminy's tool, but it does a lot more steps  

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* try this? `cd folder; zip -r ../zipped_dir.zip * && mv ../zipped_dir.zip ../zipped_dir.lpf`

**Ivan Herman:** I wasn't here when the discussion happened  
… there is this archival tool on mac called Unarchiver but it installs command-line tools as well  

**Ivan Herman:** e.g., it can list the contents of an archive  
… and archive and unarchive  

**Wendy Reid:** I'll try all of this today  
… DPUB summit is going on; you can watch the talks online  
… on Friday at noon EST, two people from NNELS, Farah and Danny, are presenting about audiobooks  
… I think this is the first public talk about audiobooks not by me :)  

> *Ivan Herman:* The presentation Wendy was talking about: [https://app.swapcard.com/event/digital-publishing-summit-2020/planning/UGxhbm5pbmdfMTA3MDAz](https://app.swapcard.com/event/digital-publishing-summit-2020/planning/UGxhbm5pbmdfMTA3MDAz)

**Charles LaPierre:** this week there is the diagram code sprint for a11y  
… on wednesday ww norton is working on extended image descriptions and a technique for putting them in epubs  

**Charles LaPierre:** and working with DAISY on this  
… it's a progressive enhancement, and he's trying to create an NPM library  
… and we could add this to reading systems  
… and have it added dynamically to older epubs  
… contact me for more info  

**Wendy Reid:** that's very exciting  
… take care, everyone  

---

No new actions

