---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-08-24
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2020-08-24
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-08-24-pwg",
        "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-08-24",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-08-24",
            "endDate": "2020-08-24",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ivan Herman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Garth Conboy"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Lars Wallin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Teenya Franklin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2020-08-24

See also the [Agenda](https://www.w3.org/mid/1A022274-D6E1-458C-B99E-163A51301891@rakuten.com) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/08/24-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Gregorio Pellegrino, Ivan Herman, Dave Cramer, Wendy Reid, Matt Garrish, Avneesh Singh, Garth Conboy, Ben Schroeter, Lars Wallin, Teenya Franklin, Bill Kasdorf, Tzviya Siegman, Brady Duga

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Dave Cramer

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


### 1. minutes
{: #section1}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-07-27-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-07-27-pwg)

**Garth Conboy:** good minutes  

**Wendy Reid:** minutes approved  

### 2. testing updates
{: #section2}

**Lars Wallin:** We focused on getting all tests passing  
… the entire suite of tests is now passing  
… we wrote unit tests for the entire list  
… we are 100% covered  
… ivan, I'm supposed to submit these?  
… a PR or something?  

**Ivan Herman:** send me a JSON file or a PR  
… it's in the description  
… it's a simple set of JSON files  

**Lars Wallin:** maybe I can process the test output  
… I'll take care of that tomorrow  

**Ivan Herman:** woo  

**Wendy Reid:** woo  

**Garth Conboy:** our engineer has unit test frameworks  
… we can do some tests with manifests, but not all of them  

**Ivan Herman:** if you don't mention test, it's considered to not have run  

**Garth Conboy:** the other comment was 49-55 are about links, we don't implement  
… 56 and 57 are not useful for us  
… those are all the pub manifest tests  
… I had a query on Friday on the JSON audio tests  
… we will have the majority of results  

**Wendy Reid:** it's still a good update  
… better than mine  
… ivan and I spoke to coursesource this morning about impl  
… they have a roadmap; don't think they will get there this year  
… but they are OK being listed as future implementer  

> *Avneesh Singh:* for meeting records, link to Obi production tool (reference implementation):

> *Avneesh Singh:* [https://daisy.org/activities/software/obi/obi-4-6-test-releases/](https://daisy.org/activities/software/obi/obi-4-6-test-releases/)

**Wendy Reid:** the implementation for Obi can't be tested in the same way  
… but I do need test results from them  

**Ivan Herman:** if we forget Ivan and Matt's implementations  
… we do have for each feature two implementations, Is that correct?  

**Wendy Reid:** yes  

**Ivan Herman:** marisa and lars  
… and 3 for most, because google  
… what should be our deadline for starting PR process  

**Wendy Reid:** we need four weeks for voting  

**Ivan Herman:** we need another two weeks for process  
… process to get PR should start first week of September  

**Tzviya Siegman:** when does the charter end?  

**Ivan Herman:** nov 1  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we should start  

**Ivan Herman:** we need to start early september, and we should tell Thorium that  
… we can wait until 5 Sept or so  
… two weeks monday we start the process  

**Wendy Reid:** sept 7  
… that's the deadline  

**Ivan Herman:** the deadline would be the friday before  
… on monday we start the process  
… should we keep the implementations of matt and myself in the list?  
… they are not reading systems  

**Wendy Reid:** you have the most experience with "the director"  

**Ivan Herman:** we keep it in, and we can tell the director what they are  

**Wendy Reid:** I'm OK  

**Matt Garrish:** ok with me  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I don't think it hurts anything, so leave it for now  

**Ivan Herman:** in the description of the implementation, we can make it clearer what they are  

**Matt Garrish:** right, if we make it clear they were for testing the spec...  
… that's being honest  

**Ivan Herman:** let's do that  

### 3. EPUB 3 WG
{: #section3}

**Wendy Reid:** the new WG was chartered two weeks ago  
… you can join now  
… . please join  
… first meeting on 11 September  
… NA/Euro time  
… then alternating with NA/Asia time  
… details on WG home page  

**Ivan Herman:** there are people in this group who are obligated to join ;)  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* I'm waiting for Cristina... that accepts my request :)

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/epub-wg/Meetings/)

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* Cristina is in Greece right now :)

> *Brady Duga:* I think we are in process of joining the group, I will click the "add me" button soon

> *Dave Cramer:* (not minuting full discussion of meeting times of a different working group)

**Wendy Reid:** AOB?  
… thanks everyone, and so happy to see test results!  

---
