---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-04-06
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2020-04-06
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-04-06-pwg",
        "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-04-06",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-04-06",
            "endDate": "2020-04-06",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ivan Herman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Geoff Jukes"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ric Wright"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Dave Cramer"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Garth Conboy"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Franco Alvarado"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "charles"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Deborah Kaplan"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2020-04-06

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2020Apr/0000.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/04/06-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Wendy Reid, Ivan Herman, Gregorio Pellegrino, Avneesh Singh, Geoff Jukes, Ric Wright, Dave Cramer, Ben Schroeter, Marisa DeMeglio, Garth Conboy, Franco Alvarado, Deborah Kaplan, Charles LaPierre, Tzviya Siegman

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Gregorio Pellegrino

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Ivan Herman:* 2020Feb/0012.html

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-03-23-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-03-23-pwg)

**Wendy Reid:** I hope everyone is safe :)  
… 3,2,1 minutes approved!  
… only topic for today is TESTING  
… we has some updates from the test projects, they help us to fix few things  
… overall the tests seems very good  
… I have a call tomorrow with Ken john from Circular flow, another implementer  

**Ivan Herman:** I'm not sure, but due to covid-19, groups who are charted till june, they can have two or three months more  
… If we want it (more time for testing o reports) we can get it, easily  

**Wendy Reid:** when this will be announced?  

**Ivan Herman:** this week, I think  

**Wendy Reid:** any updates? from testing? anything?  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* coronavirus situation? :) ****

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://w3c.github.io/audiobooks-wg-charter/](https://w3c.github.io/audiobooks-wg-charter/)

**Wendy Reid:** one thing we have to do is to make a maintenance WG to maintain audiobooks specifications  
… (to address any issues they can came following the REC track)  
… if anyone has comments, please open issues  
… this is what will happen after the end of this WG  

**Ivan Herman:** this week we will mail to AC reps telling what we are going to do  
… it will help if AC reps reply to the email  
… so the management can understand that people are interested in this charter  

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1 Will do Ivan

**Ivan Herman:** also if you don't have any comment to the charter of the audiobook WG, please endorse the creation of the WG  

**Garth Conboy:** is it o.k. to show this to my AC rep?  

**Ivan Herman:** Yep, but the email answer should come when the mail is sent out to the AC  

**Garth Conboy:** do you know when will it happen?  

**Ivan Herman:** I hope this week  

**Avneesh Singh:** in the AB we observed that the volounteer contribution all slow down...  
… we discussed to extend charters, it is better to have a backup if we have not many responses  

**Ivan Herman:** I'm afraid of that, too. Originally when we discussed the EPUB WG charter, the idea was to go to the AC at the end of april  
… there is an overall slowdown, so this may have to come later  

**Garth Conboy:** do you want to set the next call?  

**Wendy Reid:** we will meet on 20th march  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* chocolate for implementers

**Wendy Reid:** it is everything for today, stay safe!  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* you're welcome

---
