---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-04-27
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2020-04-27
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-04-27-pwg",
        "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-04-27",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-04-27",
            "endDate": "2020-04-27",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Dave Cramer"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ivan Herman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Tzviya Siegman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Teenya Franklin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Bill Kasdorf"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Laurent Le Meur"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Joshua Pyle"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Marisa DeMeglio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "David Stroup"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2020-04-27

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2020Apr/0005.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/04/27-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Wendy Reid, Gregorio Pellegrino, Dave Cramer, Ivan Herman, Tzviya Siegman, Teenya Franklin, Bill Kasdorf, Charles LaPierre, Laurent Le Meur, Joshua Pyle, Avneesh Singh, Ben Schroeter, Marisa DeMeglio, Brady Duga, David Stroup

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** Aderet Siegman

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Dave Cramer

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Wendy Reid:** welcome  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-04-06-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-04-06-pwg)

### 1. minutes
{: #section1}

**Wendy Reid:** minutes approved  

### 2. testing
{: #section2}

**Wendy Reid:** we don't have new test results  
… . Colobrio is working on running test cases  
… Ken Jones' Circularflo implemented an audiobook builder for InDesign  
… it works! it's cool! There might be a free trial in May.  
… any other updates on implementations?  

**Laurent Le Meur:** Thorium reader is now audiobook compliant with w3C audiobooks and LCP  

**Laurent Le Meur:** will be released on Windows 10, Mac, and Linux  
… I will start doing the tests!  

**Wendy Reid:** that's awesome news!  
… happy to help  

**Laurent Le Meur:** I probably won't test audiobook with primary entry page with embedded manifest  
… those tests might not past  
… but a standard audiobook with manifest and tracks and toc should work  

**Wendy Reid:** we're still on track for Q2  
… any other updates or questions?  

### 3. Charter
{: #section3}

**Wendy Reid:** our charter ends at the end of June  
… looks like we won't be in PR by the end of June  
… there have been delays caused by world events  
… so the chairs are thinking about asking for a three-month charter extension  
… I think we could get more implementations  
… and gives us the summer for testing  

**Ivan Herman:** I know I am European; but life stops in the summer here  
… to finish in September, we need an AC vote happening in July and August  
… so we'd need everything lined up in July  
… is this enough time?  

**Bill Kasdorf:** how does this relate to restructuring of P@W3C work in general  

**Wendy Reid:** it won  
… 't have a big impact  
… it might delay the start of an EPUB 3 WG  

**Bill Kasdorf:** that is what I was anticipating  

**Ivan Herman:** it's possible, but the two things are not really related  
… some extra load on Wendy and Ivan, since we have responsibilities in both groups  
… if EPUB WG went to AC tomorrow, it might happen  
… I don't think it's a huge factor  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I agree with what Ivan said  
… this summer might be different  

**Aderet:** wooooooo  

**Tzviya Siegman:** people might not take the same vacations  

**Aderet:** oooooooooo  

**Tzviya Siegman:** our goal is to finish as quickly as possible  
… we don't know what will happen in Europe in July and August  
… we can try to avoid an AC vote in July and August  
… but I don't think we should make decisions based on past European work/vacation schedules  

**Wendy Reid:** even if everyone takes august off, the voting could happen in September  

**Avneesh Singh:** vacation is not such a big issue  
… but I think we should have a one month buffer, why not ask for four months?  
… regarding overlap, one thing is the TPAC meeting. I don't think TPAC will be a constraint, and that we should have extended review time for the charter  
… on implementation side, I have constraints in May and June, but could then help with implementations at DAISY  

**Wendy Reid:** I think in-person TPAC is unlikely  

**Ivan Herman:** I would agree with Avneesh; let's go for four months  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1 to 4 months

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* +4

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

**Ivan Herman:** we need a formal resolution  

> **Proposed resolution: Request 4-month extension to charter, moving end date to October 31st** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Joshua Pyle:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* +4

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1

> *Avneesh Singh:* +1

> *Laurent Le Meur:* +1

> *Charles LaPierre:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Marisa DeMeglio:* +1

> *Teenya Franklin:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *David Stroup:* +1

**Aderet:** too young to vote  

> ***Resolution #1: Request 4-month extension to charter, moving end date to October 31st***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

**Wendy Reid:** that's resolved. That's it for today's agenda  
… we'll probably have a meeting in a few weeks. Thanks all!  

---


### 4. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Request 4-month extension to charter, moving end date to October 31st
