---
layout: minutes
date: 2020-09-14
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2020-09-14
json-ld: |
    {
        "@context": "https://schema.org/",
        "@type": "CreativeWork",
        "url": "https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-09-14-pwg",
        "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes",
        "about": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
        "dateCreated": "2020-09-14",
        "genre": "Meeting Minutes",
        "publisher": {
            "@type": "Organization",
            "name": "World Wide Web Consortium",
            "url": "https://www.w3.org/"
        },
        "recordedAt": {
            "@type": "Event",
            "name": "Publishing Working Group Telco",
            "startDate": "2020-09-14",
            "endDate": "2020-09-14",
            "attendee": [
                {
                    "@type": "OrganizationRole",
                    "roleName": "chair",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Wendy Reid"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Role",
                    "roleName": "scribe",
                    "attendee": [
                        {
                            "@type": "Person",
                            "name": "Gregorio Pellegrino"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ivan Herman"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Avneesh Singh"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "gregorio"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Juliette McShane"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Ben Schroeter"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Laurent Le Meur"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "charles"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Charles LaPierre"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Brady Duga"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Garth Conboy"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Teenya Franklin"
                },
                {
                    "@type": "Person",
                    "name": "Matt Garrish"
                }
            ]
        }
    }
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}

**Date:** 2020-09-14

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2020Sep/0002.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2020/09/14-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Ivan Herman, Avneesh Singh, gregorio, Gregorio Pellegrino, Juliette McShane, Ben Schroeter, Laurent Le Meur, charles, Charles LaPierre, Brady Duga, Garth Conboy, Teenya Franklin, Matt Garrish

**Regrets:** Bill Kasdorf, Tzviya Siegman, George Kerscher, Lars Wallin

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Gregorio Pellegrino

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-08-24-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2020/2020-08-24-pwg)

**Wendy Reid:** Hi everyone! We are getting close to the end of the charter, this is one of the last call  
… minutes approved!  
… join the EPUB3 WG!  
… we have to talk about last things before sending the docs  
… we are resolving some issue that became during testing  

**Matt Garrish:** mostly there where issue with the TOC  
… and the primary entry page  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* (can you post the issue URLs in IRC)?

**Matt Garrish:** the linking method required for the primary entry page, and also if it was required (it depends on the format)  
… there was also a mismatching between the processing algorithm and the TOC specs  

**Garth Conboy:** in the current spec we will get: TOC is not required  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* *quite difficult to scribe :(*

**Garth Conboy:** if you have one it needs to be `<nav role="doc-toc">`  

**Ivan Herman:** the fact that we removed the requirement, it means we have to pickup one of the tests from the test suite  
… it is in the index page  

**Laurent Le Meur:** doing that you can close issue #65  

**Garth Conboy:** we think it's likely people will read this and will do it the right way  

**Ivan Herman:** the TOC discussion was the longest and most passionate we had last year  
… we got a compromise  

**Matt Garrish:** could we point a note there?  

**Wendy Reid:** regular or editor's note?  

**Ivan Herman:** regular note  

> ***Action #1: add note to audiobooks (Wendy Reid)***
{: #action1 .action}

**Laurent Le Meur:** it is good to have a note now, but as a maintenance issue I think we have to manage it correctly  

**Ivan Herman:** in theory the new version of the W3C process will become live tomorrow, so when this document will become a rec, we can made some modifications, without having to come back to the beginning  
… the idea is something like a "live-recommendation"  
… we have to vote for this type of recommendation  

> **Proposed resolution: Request the Director to move Publication Manifest and Audiobooks to Proposed Recommendation** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Laurent Le Meur:* +1

> *Avneesh Singh:* +1

> *Juliette McShane:* +0

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: +1

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> ***Resolution #1: Request the Director to move Publication Manifest and Audiobooks to Proposed Recommendation***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

> **Proposed resolution: Request the Director allow Publication Manifest and Audiobooks to be continuously developed as part of the the maintenance working group per Process 2020** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Matt Garrish:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Juliette McShane:* +1

> *Teenya Franklin:* +1

**Avneesh Singh:** Ivan there are two type of continuous process in process 2020  

> **Proposed resolution: Request the Director allow Publication Manifest and Audiobooks to be continuously developed as part of the the maintenance working group per Process 2020 after achieving Recommendation Status** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Ben Schroeter:* +1

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

> *Avneesh Singh:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Laurent Le Meur:* +1

> *Juliette McShane:* +1

> ***Resolution #2: Request the Director allow Publication Manifest and Audiobooks to be continuously developed as part of the the maintenance working group per Process 2020 after achieving Recommendation Status***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

**Ivan Herman:** now on the practical stuff, I wait for a green light from Matt to start the process  
… when we start the process, we can't edit the specs  
… I hope the guy who made all the comments has finished with his work :)  

**Wendy Reid:** I think it somebody from Laurent's team  

**Laurent Le Meur:** Yes! It is Pierre  

**Ivan Herman:** His work was great, but I hope he has finished ;-)  

**Laurent Le Meur:** Yep, he is done  

**Ivan Herman:** once the PR has gone, your company rep has to vote  

**Wendy Reid:** thank you to all  

---


### 1. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): Request the Director to move Publication Manifest and Audiobooks to Proposed Recommendation
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): Request the Director allow Publication Manifest and Audiobooks to be continuously developed as part of the the maintenance working group per Process 2020 after achieving Recommendation Status

### 2. Action Items
{: #act}

* [Action #1](#action1): add note to audiobooks (Wendy Reid)
