---
layout: minutes
date: 2019-06-24
title: PWG Weekly Telco — 2019-06-24
---

# PWG Weekly Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}
***– DRAFT Minutes –***
{: .draft_notice}

**Date:** 2019-06-24

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2019Jun/0024.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2019/06/24-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Deborah Kaplan, Tzviya Siegman, Dave Cramer, George Kerscher, Franco Alvarado, Benjamin Young, David Stroup, Joshua Pyle, Ben Schroeter, Simon Collinson, Geoff Jukes, Jun Gamou, Brady Duga, Bill Kasdorf, Garth Conboy

**Regrets:** Ivan Herman, Wendy Reid, Avneesh Singh, Laurent Le Meur, Luc Audrain, Gregorio Pellegrino, Romain Deltour, Nick Ruffilo, Tim Cole

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Tzviya Siegman

**Scribe(s):** Benjamin Young

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


**Tzviya Siegman:** lots of folks in Paris because of the EDRLab meeting  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2019/2019-06-17-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2019/2019-06-17-pwg)

**Tzviya Siegman:** let's take a look at last week's meeting notes  
… any comments?  

> *Benjamin Young:* scribe+ dauwhe

**Tzviya Siegman:** k...minutes approved  
… josh and franco are you both here?  

**Franco Alvarado:** yep  

**Joshua Pyle:** indeed  

**Tzviya Siegman:** then you can take us through the finalizing steps for the UCR document  

### 1. FInalizing UCR for Publication
{: #section1}

**Joshua Pyle:** I nominate franco to go first  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://w3c.github.io/dpub-pwp-ucr/](https://w3c.github.io/dpub-pwp-ucr/)

**Franco Alvarado:** so josh and I would like some feedback on a couple more issues  
… first one is issue #213  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues](https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues)

**Franco Alvarado:** josh suggests it seems to recommend that the document be using DRM  
… rather than possibly using it  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* github: [https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues](https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues)

**Franco Alvarado:** so, we suggest a change to mention the possibility  
… but not make it sound like a requirement  

> *Franco Alvarado:* A Web Publication must not prevent any other system from expressing access control and write protections of the publication.

> *Dave Cramer:* github: [https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues/213](https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues/213)

**Joshua Pyle:** I just agreed with the TAG reviewer  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* github: [https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues/213](https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues/213)

**Joshua Pyle:** I think it is a little problematic  

**Franco Alvarado:** I just pasted in the recommended rephrasing--reading it now  

**Franco Alvarado:** "A Web Publication must not prevent any other system from expressing access control and rights protections of the publication."  

**Dave Cramer:** do we need to make a statement around this at all?  

**Joshua Pyle:** dauwhe are you suggesting we leave it as is?  
… despite the TAG feedback?  

**Dave Cramer:** no, I'm more thinking about dropping the use case  

**Joshua Pyle:** ah. quite right. that's been my go to rememdy  
… it had been my position to take it out (in general)  
… and we took a lot out, so I've been concerned we'd taken too much out  
… so I wanted to check with the group on this one  

**Tzviya Siegman:** this should probably point to 16 not 17  
… I think the reason this is in here is not the "classic"/traditional content protection use case  
… but rather than library use case for content protection  
… so I'm a little hesitant to pull it completely  
… the other case is making sure folks with disability can access it--despite the DRM  

**Franco Alvarado:** I'm in agreement that it should remain and be rephrased  
… like the WP may be subject to this, rather than it containing those protections in itself  

**Tzviya Siegman:** "A Web Publication must not prevent any other system from expressing access control and write protections of the publication."  

**Brady Duga:** I prefer the original text  
… the revision is not quite right  
… a WP must not do something  
… if I want to make a WP that cannot be DRM'd, I should be allowed to do that  
… I think it's more that WP's not prevent using DRM  
… this rephrasing makes it sound like WP's should always be compatible with DRM  
… and I don't think we should make that a requirement  

**Tzviya Siegman:** the goal seems to be that it should be compatible with DRM, but not require it  

**Dave Cramer:** I sort of agree with duga  
… we keep saying DRM, but are we talking about encrypting content and stuff  
… or are we saying something more like logging into a bank account?  
… for which you need a login to use at all  
… like with the NY Times, I have to be a subscriber to access the content  
… that seems pretty implicit to the design of the Web  
… we are not creating use cases that say every publication must be accessible to anyone with that URL  
… so perhaps there's a way to express this more compatibly with the rest of the Web  

**Joshua Pyle:** I didn't choose the "write", but I think it's correct  
… these aren't "right" as in access permissions--these are protecting from writing  
… I hadn't thought of the earlier mention of preventing DRM  
… not sure why someone would do that  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* current wording is "A Web Publication should be able to express the access control and write protections of the publication."

> *Bill Kasdorf:* I think we should explicitly be agnostic on the issue.

**Joshua Pyle:** in light of that, I'm back to wondering why say anything about it  

**Tzviya Siegman:** franco and josh could you remind us about the TAG comment on this one?  
… and why we're discussing it  

> *Franco Alvarado:* UC 121: Alice acquires a Packaged Web Publication through a subscription service and downloads it. When, later on, she decides to unsubscribe from the service, this Web Publication becomes unavailable to her.

**Franco Alvarado:** the comment said, this seems problematic for this particular use case  

**Tzviya Siegman:** this probably just needs explanation  

**Dave Cramer:** the other interesting this is that as phrased right now it seems like a question of metadata  
… are we proposing that we need an access control vocabulary  
… it sort of comes down to the question of who are we talking about here  
… if I'm putting a journal online  
… I can setup whatever registration access control that I want  
… again we seem to have an implicit assumption that we're talking about a file format or something  
… that could include a permissions expression or access control vocabulary  
… all of that strikes me as odd  

**Franco Alvarado:** I think what dauwhe is describing here, is that there would be something in the WP that would express the right/write protection  
… I'm not versed in DRM at all  
… but I still think this just needs rephrasing  
… since we have subscription and library scenarios, I'd think we should keep it  
… the current way it's being stated seems to dictate something we're not wanting to dictate  
… the rephrasing suggestion currently may not work, but I can propose something else  

**Joshua Pyle:** agreed. In my comment on the issue, I was noting that it seemed like the WP was somehow including this metadata  
… we don't want to suggest that the WP includes a method of access control or DRM  

**Brady Duga:** so, I think I agree with all of that  
… if we're rewriting that, just make it clear that the access control is something external to a WP  
… and that the WP shouldn't break such a mechanism  

**Tzviya Siegman:** so I think we should change UCR 16 to allowing for this  
… it should just be a minor tweak  
… franco and josh please work on this one, and send it around--unless you have wording right now  

**Joshua Pyle:** I think it's fine to go offline  
… I'd only ask if we resolve this online, and finalize it next week  
… and then agree to it on github  

**Tzviya Siegman:** exactly  

**Garth Conboy:** I just wanted to comment, whatever the agreed language, we should focus more on ‘not disable’ rather than ‘should enable’  

> *George Kerscher:* I like it too.

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

**Tzviya Siegman:** it needs to function, not just not function  

> *Joshua Pyle:* A Web Publication must not prevent any other system from expressing access control and write protections of the publication.

**Tzviya Siegman:** duga feel free to disagree with that. :)  
… unless duga you've come around  

**Brady Duga:** I don't know. It seems like we're forcing all these to have access control applied to them  
… there may be places where you want the opposite  
… and I'm concerned about making "must not prevent" being a use case  

**Tzviya Siegman:** agreed. I think we've come full circle  
… and I'm leaning on josh and franco to tweak the wording  
… the other issues is #215  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues/215](https://github.com/w3c/dpub-pwp-ucr/issues/215)

**Joshua Pyle:** I hope everyone's reading these, but this one has to do with CSS counters  
… and in this case, across resources  
… if I had a 15 chapter legal document that had paragraph numbering  
… a lot of times, you'd use a CSS counter to number all of those  
… but that doesn't work across documents  
… there was a requirement that WP's somehow support something that I don't know how to do in CSS  
… you can hard code the numbering of course  
… I put a comment in there, and got some feedback  
… one of them said, I thought this was about page numbering  
… and I don't think it is  
… so my first question, is this about CSS numbering across documents?  
… and having CSS seed the starting number from a previous document  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* typically publishers would want to control the numbering via hard coding anyway--especially legal

**Joshua Pyle:** and if so, how do deal that in a world that doesn't work that way  

**Dave Cramer:** the use case is a little weird  
… the user is requesting a specific technology to achieve a larger goal  
… we sort of assume having multiple HTML documents is the ultimate goal  
… and that CSS is the only way to achieve that goal  
… which I think sets us up for failure  
… because I think this will always be impossible in CSS  

> *Bill Kasdorf:* not always, just "typically"

**Dave Cramer:** going up to the requirement...I don't see this as a requirement  
… is this something a web content creator thinks about  
… is there concern about documents being layered on top of each other?  

> *Brady Duga:* +1K

**Dave Cramer:** I think this on is not very well expressed  

> *Franco Alvarado:* +1

**Dave Cramer:** I'd be happy to take this one out  

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

**Dave Cramer:** and it's associated use cases  

> *George Kerscher:* +1 to what Dave said.

**Tzviya Siegman:** I do think we were originally talking about page numbering  
… it was a very long time ago  
… in some sort of idealized world, perhaps this included figure numbering  
… and this needs to be customizable  
… you can't create a rule about these things  
… because it's going to vary  
… things like section numbering will vary from publication to publication  
… like josh is explaining, unless you use variables and share them across resources...  
… this one needs to come out  

**Garth Conboy:** my recollection was that this was originally about OL's across documents  
… but I also agree that we shouldn't legislate the impossible  

**Joshua Pyle:** I'm reading it right now, and it does talk about section numbering  
… maybe it was about page numbering initially  
… but it now includes section numbering  

**George Kerscher:** if anyone's going to reference paragraph numbers in a legal document, you don't want that auto generated anyway  

> *Benjamin Young:* +1

> *Brady Duga:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> *Franco Alvarado:* +1

> *Tzviya Siegman:* +1

> *Joshua Pyle:* +100

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Geoff Jukes:* +1

> *Deborah Kaplan:* +1

> *Dave Cramer:* Kill! Kill! Kill!

> *George Kerscher:* +1

**Tzviya Siegman:** very good. then josh and franco please remove that section  
… and tweak requirement 16  
… about access control  
… and you'll send that around to the group for review  
… and then hopefully declare this publishable  

**Joshua Pyle:** yeah. we've got a few more things to clean up, but yeah, we should be able to meet the end of June deadline  

**Tzviya Siegman:** then you can work with ivan on the details of publishing this document  
… I'm sure he's on email during the summit  
… so. that's it for our agenda  
… anything else?  
… ok. class dismissed!  

---
