% PWG Asia Telco — 2019-02-17

![W3C Logo](https://www.w3.org/Icons/w3c_home)


# PWG Asia Telco — Minutes

***– DRAFT Minutes –***


**Date:** 2019-02-17

See also the [Agenda]() and the [IRC Log](undefined)

## Attendees

**Present:** Tzviya Siegman, florian[m], jKamata, Dave Cramer, Toshiaki Koike, Jun-ichi Yoshii, Jun Gamou, Avneesh Singh, Wendy Reid, Yu-Wei Chang (Yanni)

**Regrets:** 

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Tzviya Siegman

**Scribe(s):** Florian Rivoal, Dave Cramer

## Content:
* [1. Overview of Publishing WG work](#1-overview-of-publishing-wg-work)

---


**Tzviya Siegman:** let's introduce eachother  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* tzviya: Wiley, co-chair PWG

**Florian Rivoal:** Invited expert, CSS-WG and AB (and other groups), based in Japan  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* Avneesh: COO of DAISY, joined with IDPF

> *Dave Cramer:* dauwhe: Dave Cramer, Hachette Book Group, CSSWG, co-chair of EPUB 3 CG, editor of EPUB 3.2

> *Avneesh Singh:* Avneesh Singh, DAISY Consortium

> *Jun Gamou:* Junko Kamata, Toshiaki Koike, Jun Gamo : We 3 are from Voyager Japan, Inc.

### 1. Overview of Publishing WG work

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/blob/master/explainers/wpub-explainer.md](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/blob/master/explainers/wpub-explainer.md)

**Tzviya Siegman:** I plan to giving an overview, but I think everyone here is familiar, so maybe a link will be enough  

**Tzviya Siegman:** additionally, we recently decided to split the work in modules  

**Tzviya Siegman:** main module is the WP, focusing on metadata and manifest  

**Tzviya Siegman:** another module is audiobooks, because of a newly discovered urgent business need  

**Tzviya Siegman:** open to do other modules, to avoid over-focusing on one domain  

**Tzviya Siegman:** interested in feedback  

**Florian Rivoal:** this a both a personal point of view and one I've heard from publishers in Japa  
… first, on EPUB 3... as you know Japan has a strong EPUB 3 market centered on Manga, and it's mostly working  
… there is not a strong need for anything new  
… having improved interop is good  
… making sure we don't break compat is extremely important  
… but mostly EPUB 3 is working  
… so no strong need for new things  
… in the longer term, people see a continuing tension between web platform and publishing platform  
… many new things in web for typography, a11y, security, etc  
… they take many years to reach publishing world  
… so the publishing side is not participating as actively as the web side  
… merging things so the browser is the book reader would solve this problem  
… it's a worthy long-term goal  
… in that context, what has been going on in PWG  
… it's unclear how this achieves these goals  
… so no one here has anything against what's been happening  
… audio books isn't a pressing need  
… the work doesn't do much for the EPUB 3 market, and it doesn't seem to bridge the gap between publisshing formats and what the browsers can do directly  

> *Florian Rivoal:* JunGamo: agree with florian

> *Florian Rivoal:* ???: what we expect from WP, is that browsers will become better at rendering Japanese text

**Tzviya Siegman:** the first part, about EPUB3 being stable  

**Tzviya Siegman:** the CG has been working on further stabilizing EPUB 3 further  

**Tzviya Siegman:** testing should help as well  

**Tzviya Siegman:** EPUB3 is stable, but could be even more  

**Tzviya Siegman:** epubcheck maintenance is important as well  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/blog/2018/10/epubcheck-fundraising/](https://www.w3.org/blog/2018/10/epubcheck-fundraising/)

> *Dave Cramer:* florian: on the EPUBCheck maintenance

> *Dave Cramer:* ... it's good that it's being maintained

> *Dave Cramer:* ... we should be careful about fixing bugs

> *Dave Cramer:* ... because EPUBCheck defines the spec

> *Dave Cramer:* ... and we don't want to break existing content

> *Dave Cramer:* tzviya: we're being careful

> *Dave Cramer:* florian: there was an issue with the relax NG grammar being updated

**Dave Cramer:** please report such bugs  

> *Tzviya Siegman:* report issues about epubcheck at [https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck](https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck)

> *Florian Rivoal:* I'll pass the message along, and ask people to report it

**Tzviya Siegman:** going back to merging publishing and the web  

**Tzviya Siegman:** that was the main reason for the merged between IDPF and W3C  

**Tzviya Siegman:** that's why I am involved  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I want to see involvement in the WG from people who want that to happen  

**Tzviya Siegman:** we have active participation from people with a different vision  

**Tzviya Siegman:** a lot of people have not seen the business case for publications on the web  

**Tzviya Siegman:** I keep hearing epub/kobo/kindle/... works for me, and people are puzzled about the business case  

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: From my understanding, there is not a pressing business need for the merger of the publishing and web platform

> *Wendy Reid:* ... as of right now, things work. But in the long term, the web is taking on more of these things.

> *Wendy Reid:* ... there are many things that are hard to do today because of the technical lag of the OWP, especially in terms of typography and language

> *Wendy Reid:* ... EPUB is lagging behind the web in this area. Selling books tomorrow is fine, but in the long term, for the benefit of readers, keeping the publishing platform at the same level as the web platform is difficult

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we do not need to do away with packaging or selling books individually. Having a packaging format for browsers is an important thing

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the only long term viable thing is to meet with the web platform

> *Wendy Reid:* Avneesh: I agree with Florian, the publishing platform needs to catch up with the web platform

> *Wendy Reid:* ... business managers cannot yet see the argument, but we need to make them aware of the long term goal, and the need for it.

> *Wendy Reid:* ... this is not specific to Japan, but to WP in general

> *Wendy Reid:* Daihei_Shiohama: I've been speaking to the other Japanese publishers in trade, many are also doing magazine publishing

> *Wendy Reid:* ... in trade publication, EPUB3 is good enough.

> *Wendy Reid:* ... for magazines, or scholarly or academic, they would require web publications

> *Wendy Reid:* ... in W3C discussions, there is a need for those kind of publications to be mentioned

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: When you say publishers of magazines or scholarly publications, what do you mean? What are the challenges?

> *Wendy Reid:* Daihei_Shiohama: Magazines are using PDF formats

> *Wendy Reid:* ... they want to make use of images and reflowable text

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the same is true in academic publishing, they are using the web for their content

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: I don't think this is different from the rest of the world, the world of magazines has never embraced EPUB

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I work for a large scholarly publisher, they use PDF or HTML

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we could have a lengthy discussion to discuss why that is

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I think we are largely revisiting discussions we've had before

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I would like to talk about what it is we can develop from an asian perspective in WP we can get your input on developing, we can thrive

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we would be a step closer to developing the relationship between web and publishing

> *Wendy Reid:* JunGamo: This may not be the main topic, but I would like to mention that mainly trade publishers are interested in DRM

> *Wendy Reid:* ... because EPUB3 distribution systems had DRM, it was used

> *Wendy Reid:* ... if there was a reason to use WP, they would demand DRM modules

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: DRM is explicitly out of scope for our charter

> *Wendy Reid:* ... encryption can exist wherever you publish

> *Wendy Reid:* ... if we succeed in creating WP, someone will create DRM

> *Wendy Reid:* JunGamo: We understand

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: I think this is both a respone to tzviya and Daihei_Shiohama

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the case for magazines or scholarly is it's better on the web than EPUB, but it's not perfect

> *Wendy Reid:* ... developing parallel solutions is not productive, we need to work with the web

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the one thing WP doesn't seem to do is get closer to UA implementation

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I hope it is the first thing we tackle

> *Daihei Shiohama:* +1 to Florian

> *Wendy Reid:* ... coming up with a packaging format for browsers, if it's not something browsers want to do, what is the point

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I do not have much to say about web packaging from Google, but strategically it is aligned with what we are looking for

> *Wendy Reid:* ... maybe we should support this effort, or create our own

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we need browsers in the discussion

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: As far as a packaging format that browsers will support, all I know of is google's web packaging

> *Wendy Reid:* ... it was proposed by the TAG, and we have been in talks with jyasskin and Kenji

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we would like to adopt it when it is ready

> *Wendy Reid:* ... if you are aware of other packaging formats, let us know

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: I am not

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: I do not think our group is equipped to provide a packaging format

> *Wendy Reid:* ... unless dauwhe has something ;)

> *Wendy Reid:* ... It's a large ask. The google project is a large undertaking involving the W3C and IETF

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we have not been as involved as we should be and make our needs know

> *Wendy Reid:* ... if that becomes a true spec, the PWG will likely adopt it

> *Wendy Reid:* dauwhe: I just want to mention one caveat, Mozilla is officially against it so far

> *Wendy Reid:* ... and I think it would require a fair amount of change to work for publishing use cases.

> *Wendy Reid:* ... Those changes are very tied up with issues of security, and makes it hard for us to participate on equal footing

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: I realize this is both big and difficult as a topic, but it's central to our effort to improve the web to include publishing

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the two activities are very different

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: I would like to change direction a big

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I want to understand if the PWG has supported our asian colleagues well enough

> *Wendy Reid:* ... if a call like this is needed, will it attract more participation

> *Wendy Reid:* ... first question is if you think there are specific issues in your area of publishing that are not being addressed?

> *Daihei Shiohama:* Florian, you should speak up!

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: One thing that has been very helpful for Japanese publishing, JL req??

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the requirement for japanese language, it helps guide a lot of the work in CSS, and not all of it is solved, but we have a map to follow

> *Wendy Reid:* ... Manga is huge, but we do not have a manga req

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/community/bdcomacg/](https://www.w3.org/community/bdcomacg/)

> *Wendy Reid:* ... if you try to compose manga to get better accessibility or richer layouts, without a rec we are working without guidance

> *Wendy Reid:* ... maybe not for a working group

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: I have provided a link to the manga/comics/bandes desinées CG

> *Tzviya Siegman:* JLReq-> [https://www.w3.org/TR/jlreq/](https://www.w3.org/TR/jlreq/)

> *Wendy Reid:* ... many from Readium are involved in that

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I think that the manga req is a good idea, but not from PWG necessarily, or maybe from CSS?

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I have been hearing a lot about the need for manga

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I have wondered if manga is the next module we work on

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I hesitate to take it up too quickly

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we worked on taxonomy for speech bubbles at one point and was very difficult

> *Jun Gamou:* +1 to Florian

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: In terms of short term market needs, I do not think that WP would be adopted in Japan, the cost benefit doesn't weigh out

> *Wendy Reid:* ... We would like to take advantage of the richness of the web platform, but it is not a short term need, we need stability

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: I would encourage you to work with the comics CG

> *Wendy Reid:* Daihei_Shiohama:

> *Wendy Reid:* Daihei_Shiohama: I totally agree with florian

> *Wendy Reid:* ... manga is such a huge business

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the whole business doesn't want to change

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the readers are looking for a faithful repoduction of the print version

> *Wendy Reid:* ... WP for manga, will be a very different product from EPUB3 FXL products

> *Florian Rivoal:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* ... who needs that, that is the question

> *Wendy Reid:* ... you need more voices from other digital content publishers, gaming companies, mobile app companies

> *Wendy Reid:* ... all the other people engaged in VR, AR, alternate content experiences

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the PWG currently doesnt' have those people, we do not hear the need

> *Wendy Reid:* ... trade publications do not need it right now, but there are segments of the industry that could make use of it

> *Wendy Reid:* ... creators of a new generation of content

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: I do think it would be very interesting to have a call with the W3C immersive reality group

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the W3C has a whole group working on this

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the brainstorming would be very interesting

> *Wendy Reid:* ... the work is being done here

> *Wendy Reid:* ... There is real interest in moving forward with manga, but florian's suggestion to move ahead with req's in the community group

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I would like to figure out, is this meeting helpful?

> *Wendy Reid:* ... would having something like this regularly attract more participation

> *Wendy Reid:* ... do you think it would attract more people?

> *Wendy Reid:* JunGamo: Speaking of time zones, this time is very good

> *Wendy Reid:* ... on the other hand, the main point of the WG is talking about the spec, Japanese publishers do not have a strong opinion on the spec currently

> *Wendy Reid:* ... changing the time zone to be better for Japan, may not increase participation

> *Wendy Reid:* jyoshii: It's very helpful for us to have a call in this time zone, in my opinion, switching time zones frequently is not so good for me

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I prefer to have a fixed time - day or night

> *Wendy Reid:* ... some will have to stay up late, I'd prefer to take the call in my pj's every time

> *Wendy Reid:* JunGamo: One more thing to add, maybe many of the Japanese people in the industry are not used to expressing themselves in English in real time

> *Wendy Reid:* ... having a meeting to put their thoughts together in Japanese, then report to the group via a translator (like Florian)

> *Avneesh Singh:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: That is a very interesting idea~

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I can't imagine having a meeting that is not my first

> *Wendy Reid:* ... language

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we experimented with a translation tool at a recent AB meeting, it was not very good, we tried the free version

> *Wendy Reid:* ... but the paid version has dictionaries that could add technical language

> *Wendy Reid:* ... a tool like this might allow us to speak more freely in our own languages

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we can consider having a pre-meeting

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: I would like to return the question

> *Wendy Reid:* ... currently the PWG is dominated by a different perspective, Japan doesn't have a strong interest in competing with that, but we might need to change philosophy and I don't want to butt in

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: I don't want to stop what we're doing, it would increase the work, I think audiobooks is very important

> *Wendy Reid:* ... once we complete the work on audiobooks, we will need something else to keep us going

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we don't have a clear way forward to merge the web and publishing platform

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I would love to work on scholarly, but Wiley is the only publisher in that area

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I would like to work on Manga, but we need buy-in from the community

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we need participation

> *Wendy Reid:* .. we need the important publishers in the room

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we need to understand the needs and requirements

> *Wendy Reid:* ... a req doc is a good step

> *Wendy Reid:* Daihei_Shiohama: I agree with tzviya and florian, the truth is that the WG after TPI, some companies are leaving, we have lost some participation because of the language issue and membership

> *Wendy Reid:* ... they don't understand what is going on and don't know how to speak out

> *Wendy Reid:* ... they aren't used to the interactions

> *Wendy Reid:* ... even if we have an asian-friendly time, it's considerate, the language issue is a huge block

> *Jun-ichi Yoshii:* +1 to Daihei

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I still think that the future is in new publication types

> *Wendy Reid:* ... scholarly, education, gaming all are needed

> *Wendy Reid:* Avneesh: I would agree with the language issues. PWG is where things become finalized, intial things happen elsewhere

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we should be throwing the ball to BG and CG for incubation of ideas and outreach, and the PWG is for writing specs

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: We started a CG for publishing, but we need chairs

> *Tzviya Siegman:* [https://www.w3.org/community/publishingcg/](https://www.w3.org/community/publishingcg/)

> *Wendy Reid:* ... W3C started a formal-ish incubation process where ideas were formed in the CGs and then it is proposed to the WG

> *Wendy Reid:* ... if we had chairs we could get this off the ground

> *Wendy Reid:* ... it is not a lot of work, setting up a regular monthly call, a github repo, it could be a good outlet for people.

> *Wendy Reid:* ... one last question, should we do this on a regular basis?

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I get the sense that it would be more valuable to address the language issue

> *Wendy Reid:* ... or a pre-meeting

> *Wendy Reid:* ... with a rep more confortable in english

> *Jun Gamou:* +1

> *Jun-ichi Yoshii:* +1

> *Daihei Shiohama:* +1 to Tzviya

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: I would be honoured to be the representative, but I cannot chair

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: Let me follow up with the chairs on the next chairs call

> *Wendy Reid:* ... which is wednesday, after the next meeting

> *Wendy Reid:* ... please let us know if we are talking too quickly or need clarification

> *Wendy Reid:* ... feel free to talk in the IRC

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I will work with Wendy, Ivan, and Garth to arrange pre-meeting on topics you feel we need to address

> *Florian Rivoal:* I wonder if we should also have pre-meeting and a messenger, not just for translating Japanese to English, but also for translating Publishing to Security/Packaging/Networking, so that we can gather study together what google is doing with web packaging, discuss our needs and requirement, and then send a messenger over to push for our feedback.

> *Wendy Reid:* ... we are sending out the agendas 2 weeks in advance, so flag issues to us if you feel they aren't being addressed

> *Wendy Reid:* florian: Since we have addressed that browser packaging is happening, the culture shock between publishing and web is as big as between asia and the US

> *Wendy Reid:* .... participation is better than waiting and seeing

> *Daihei Shiohama:* Great!

> *Wendy Reid:* tzviya: Let's set up time to talk

> *Wendy Reid:* ... I will send the minutes out tomorrow

> *Jun Gamou:* Thank you, Tsviya and all for the meeting

> *Toshiaki Koike:* thank you

> *Tzviya Siegman:* rrasagent, make logs public

---
