---
layout: minutes
date: 2019-03-18
title: Publishing Working Group Telco — 2019-03-18
---

# Publishing Working Group Telco — Minutes
{: .no_toc}


**Date:** 2019-03-18

See also the [Agenda](https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-publ-wg/2019Mar/0015.html) and the [IRC Log](https://www.w3.org/2019/03/18-pwg-irc.txt)

## Attendees
{: .no_toc}
**Present:** Ivan Herman, Luc Audrain, Jun Gamou, Wendy Reid, George Kerscher, Gregorio Pellegrino, Bill Kasdorf, Garth Conboy, Ben Schroeter, Avneesh Singh, Caroline Hayes, Brady Duga, Teenya Franklin, Geoff Jukes, Laurent Le Meur

**Regrets:** Tzviya Siegman, Romain Deltour, Franco Alvarado, Charles LaPierre, Daniel Weck, Joshua Pyle, Matt Garrish, Dave Cramer, Deborah Kaplan, Benjamin Young

**Guests:** 

**Chair:** Wendy Reid

**Scribe(s):** Garth Conboy

## Content:
{: .no_toc}

* TOC
{:toc}
---


> *Wendy Reid:* [https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2019/2019-03-11-pwg](https://www.w3.org/publishing/groups/publ-wg/Meetings/Minutes/2019/2019-03-11-pwg)

**Wendy Reid:** approve minutes  
… Silence == consent  

> ***Resolution #1: last week's minutes are accepted***
{: #resolution1 .resolution}

### 1. #407 pull request acceptance
{: #section1}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/pull/407](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/pull/407)

**Wendy Reid:** Matt submitted PR to restructure Spec; chars have reviews; okay to merge?  

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Wendy Reid:* +1

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

**Wendy Reid:** Merge it!  

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

### 2. issue closing
{: #section2}

**Wendy Reid:** topics for today — list of issues to close!  
… 19 items, many old  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22propose+closing%22](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22propose+closing%22)

#### 2.1. Should linking from manifests support URI templates?
{: #section2-1}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/67](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/67)

**Wendy Reid:** #67 not that important; can close?  

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

**Wendy Reid:** Silence == consent  

#### 2.2. What does modification date mean?
{: #section2-2}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/73](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/73)

**Wendy Reid:** What does modification date mean?  
… Matt’s change has been made; go ahead and close?  
… yes.  

#### 2.3. Infoset feedbacks
{: #section2-3}

**Wendy Reid:** Infoset feedback : Accessibility compliance information  
… We’ve expunged Infoset.  So close 178, 179, 180, 181?  
… Close 178…181 — all infoset related.  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/178](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/178)

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/179](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/179)

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/180](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/180)

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/181](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/181)

#### 2.4. Bring back popular EPUB 2.x/3.x metadata?
{: #section2-4}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/187](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/187)

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

**Wendy Reid:** #187: Bring back popular EPUB 2.x/3.x metadata?  

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

**Ivan Herman:** it’s all doable with the extension mechanism, not necessary for the core spec  

**Wendy Reid:** close #187  

#### 2.5. Sortable metadata string
{: #section2-5}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/188](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/188)

**Wendy Reid:** #188: Sortable metadata strings propose closing topic:manifest topic:metadata  
… Reopen if comes up again  
… close!  

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

#### 2.6. linking to multiple manifests
{: #section2-6}

**Wendy Reid:** #189: linking to multiple manifests  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/189](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/189)

**Wendy Reid:** wording change to MAY (for linkage to manifests), from SHOULD.  
… close?  
… crickets  

**Ivan Herman:** lukewarm discussion.  Almost a year old.  

**Wendy Reid:** close.  

#### 2.7. resources that belong to more than one Web Publication
{: #section2-7}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/190](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/190)

**Wendy Reid:** #190: "resources that belong to more than one Web Publication"  
… yes, this is possible  
… that way in the spec  

**Luc Audrain:** when packaged a different story.  
… don’t see the issue  

**Ivan Herman:** me neither  

**Wendy Reid:** close!  

#### 2.8. Informing the user that the current resource is part of a web publication
{: #section2-8}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/201](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/201)

**Wendy Reid:** #201: Informing the user that the current resource is part of a web publication  

**Ivan Herman:** should move to affordances, not in spec anymore.  

**Wendy Reid:** close as no longer relevant.  

#### 2.9. Document should call out specific actions/notes for User Agents
{: #section2-9}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/204](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/204)

**Wendy Reid:** #204: Document should call out specific actions/notes for User Agents  

**Ivan Herman:** Affordances too.  

**Wendy Reid:** close  

#### 2.10. Letting the author control pagination vs scrolling
{: #section2-10}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/207)

**Wendy Reid:** #207: Letting the author control pagination vs scrolling  
… CSS can do?  Not for WP?  

**Luc Audrain:** issue with FL  

**Brady Duga:** If done in CSS that’s at doc level, not publication level.  Likely needs to be at the top level.  
… Should this be under author “control” (maybe better “intent”); browsers aren’t gonna do it.  

**Ivan Herman:** Might want to come back to UA hints.  Maybe want those in the manifest.  
… we shouldn’t deal with this in bits and pieces.  
… EPUB hints (if any), should they move in?  

**Brady Duga:** We were vaguely successful in EPUB land (e.g., page progression direction, FL stuff).  
… Should close this one, and open one that (hint) direction.  

**Ivan Herman:** Should note what worked in EPUB.  

**Luc Audrain:** +1  

**Wendy Reid:** close this one, open a new one.  Brady will make new issue.  

**Ivan Herman:** those that work in EPUB.  

**Luc Audrain:** Hadrien’s manifest comparison can help.  

**Wendy Reid:** close this one (#207), and create a specific one for _all_ hints of this sort  

#### 2.11. Hints about resources in "default reading order" or "list of resources"
{: #section2-11}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/222](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/222)

**Wendy Reid:** #222: Hints about resources in "default reading order" or "list of resources"  
… those EPUB hints about linked resources (SVG, scripting)  

**Ivan Herman:** which are values  

**Wendy Reid:** UA’s can check content if need be.  

> *Wendy Reid:* garth: We don't find the hints particularly trustworthy, EPUB wasn't successful with this one

**Garth Conboy:** not really trustable, should close  

**Luc Audrain:** burdens on author  

**Wendy Reid:** close!  

#### 2.12. Cover infoset requirements is unclear
{: #section2-12}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/260](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/260)

**Wendy Reid:** #260: Cover infoset requirements is unclear  
… No more infoset  
… close  

#### 2.13. Only allow embedded manifests
{: #section2-13}

**Wendy Reid:** #327: Only allow embedded manifests  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/327](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/327)

**Garth Conboy:** Given the direction we have gone with audiobooks, the PEP is not required, that forces closure of this one by example, there won't be an embedded manifest in audiopubs

**Wendy Reid:** good point  
… any opposition?  

**Ivan Herman:** audiobook is clearly saying separate manifest.  

> *Avneesh Singh:* Entry page is still a must in WP.

**Ivan Herman:** But for WPUB, there is a whole lot of security issues that are better handles in the case of an embedded manifest. Should there be something in spec waying that if you’re on the Web, embedding should be a _SHOULD_?  
… also, schema.org engines only understand manifest if included in HTML.  
… Shouldn’t be required, but encouraged.  

**Wendy Reid:** Leave open?  

**Ivan Herman:** turn into advice to editor and close with that?  

**Bill Kasdorf:** anything required?  

**Ivan Herman:** if there is a PEP, manifest should be embedded (not required, though).  

**Aveneesh:** PEP is a MUST in WP.  

**Wendy Reid:** For WP, advise “yes” on embed.  

**Ivan Herman:** And then close with this change.  

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Bill Kasdorf:* +1

> **Proposed resolution: For #327 we ask the editor to make the change that the manifest SHOULD be embedded into the PEP when present** *(Wendy Reid)*
{: .proposed_resolution}

> *Garth Conboy:* +1

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

> *Avneesh Singh:* +1

> ***Resolution #2: For #327 we ask the editor to make the change that the manifest SHOULD be embedded into the PEP when present***
{: #resolution2 .resolution}

#### 2.14. Several pagelists?
{: #section2-14}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/342](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/342)

**Wendy Reid:** #342: Several pagelists?  

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/342](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/342)

**Wendy Reid:** and be closed for the core  
… Could be required in an academic profile.  

> *Avneesh Singh:* +1

**Wendy Reid:** close.  

> *Geoff Jukes:* +1

> *Luc Audrain:* +1

> *Ivan Herman:* +1

> *Gregorio Pellegrino:* +1

#### 2.15. Example for a TOC as JSON in an Audiobooks?
{: #section2-15}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/369](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/369)

**Wendy Reid:** #369: Example for a TOC as JSON in an Audiobook  
… HTML is fine as optional and format as specified.  
… won’t always have TOC for audiobooks.  
… Straight audio can cover may not have one.  
… #376 is still open, about encoding manifest.  
… #369 we can close now.  
… close  

#### 2.16. Optional HTML TOC
{: #section2-16}

> *Wendy Reid:* [https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/402](https://github.com/w3c/wpub/issues/402)

**Wendy Reid:** #402: Optional HTML TOC  
… can close, as we’ve decided on HTML TOC.  
… and be optional.  
… close!  

**Avneesh Singh:** lots of TOC issues.  

**Garth Conboy:** Left #376 & #408 for futurue discussions.  

> *Geoff Jukes:* +1 to closing

**Wendy Reid:** not dropping topic, but closing just these.  
… End of list!  

### 3. AOB
{: #section3}

#### 3.1. F2F
{: #section3-1}

**Garth Conboy:** Populate: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-TB-_KCg97smmjcsbIVpi728qduOwESr3Og91-2Gtd4/edit#heading=h.4drfu5m5pp9w  

**Wendy Reid:** Do the right thing!  

#### 3.2. Eubcheck new release
{: #section3-2}

> *Luc Audrain:* [https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck/releases/tag/v4.2.0-rc](https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck/releases/tag/v4.2.0-rc)

**Luc Audrain:** epubhceck 4.2 release candidate published today — woo hoo!  
… Important for folks to test it!  
… especially distributors.  

**Ivan Herman:** Will there be blog about this?  

**Luc Audrain:** Yes, in process.  

**Bill Kasdorf:** Timeline?  

**Luc Audrain:** Final version — end of March.  Will be a bit behind that.  
… into April.  

**Wendy Reid:** Thanks.  

**George Kerscher:** ASAP, though.  

**Wendy Reid:** End a few min early!  
… Bye!  

---


### 4. Resolutions
{: #res}

* [Resolution #1](#resolution1): last week's minutes are accepted
* [Resolution #2](#resolution2): For #327 we ask the editor to make the change that the manifest SHOULD be embedded into the PEP when present
